The fourth and
final issue we're gonna talk about
on performance evaluation
is process versus outcome.
And the first issue we want to add here
is that a firm ought to, and individuals
ought to consider a broader set of
objectives than they typically consider.
So organizations usually care
not just about what happens,
but how it happens,
how a person goes about their job.
So for example, perhaps most importantly,
along the way to creating some outcome,
what impact did that employee
have on other employees?
What impact did they have on others.
Can you fold that into
the performance evaluation as well.
This just highlights that
we tend to care more,
we care about more things than just
what is traditionally measured.
And, so one prescription that comes
from it is to measure more things.
An example of why we do this,
is research by.
Bond, Carlson and Keeney, they found that
people considered too few objectives.
And this is in negotiation settings,
this is in decision making settings,
that you ask people what
they're trying to accomplish.
They'll list a few objectives but
then if you ask others.
They ask a large group and then you share
all the possible answers with people
will go back and say,
oh yeah, I forgot that.
And I'll add that in the end, they listed
on their own something like about half of
all the objectives they
ultimately recognize as relevant.
So, left to our own devices,
we're a little too casual,
a little too informal about focusing on a
few narrow issues instead of a broad set.
Now it can lead firms
to focus too narrowly.
An example of a firm that recognized this,
Dell Computers in the early 2000s,
famously hard-charging,
famously results-oriented,
changed their performance evaluations.
They changed from 100%
results-based to 50% results-based.
What an employee accomplished.
And 50% how he or she accomplished it.
So they're judging not only
what the person does, but
their impact on other people, because they
had too much experience with managers that
were running over people to hit
the numbers to get the bonus.
And in fact,
the firm cared about things other than
just the numbers that were being measured.
In general the more uncertainty
there is in an environment,
the less control an employee
has over the exact outcomes.
The more a firm should
emphasize process over outcome.
So the more noise, the less control
the employee has the more they should be
evaluated on process and not on outcome.
One way you can go about this,
is to use analytics to figure out
which processes tend to
produce the desired outcomes.
And what you're looking for
here is what's the more
fundamental driver of the outcome?
It could be that you're measuring only
the last step in the process, and
in fact there are some
important intermediate steps
that are more fundamental, and they might
provide additional performance measures.
So, for example, the sports analytics
world gives us an illustration of this.
In hockey, for
a long time teams were evaluated,
in fact players were evaluated,
based on goals.
And if you were trying to figure out
whether a team was really good, or
poor they'd look at the number
of goals they'd been scoring.
If they wanted to evaluate
whether a player was strong or
weak, they would look at his contribution
to the goals scored while he was on ice.
And this is fine, and
it's related, and it's important.
But can you do better?
It turns out there aren't
many goals scored in hockey.
And sometimes they are scored,
because they hit the pole and
went left when others aren't scored,
because they hit the pole and went right.
They tip off of people's skates
all kinds of crazy things happens.
There is a lot of noise between what a
player controls and what actually happens.
And whenever there's that noise you
want to be careful about how much
weight you put on it.
It's not giving you a very reliable
signal for the true effort, or
the true ability underneath it.
So what do they do?
They determined through analytics that a
better predictor was not goals, but shots.
That if you looked at how many shots,
they call it shots on goal,
shots that were hit, basically,
at the goal, at the net.
That was a better predictor,
that was a more reliable measure.
And one way to think about it is,
it's more persistent that a guy, or
a player, or a team that looks
good in one period on shots,
is more likely to look good
in the next period on shots.
Than a player who looks good on goals,
is to look good on goals the next period.
It's a more persistent,
more fundamental measure.
Well you can take that even further they
subsequently realized what really matters
is possession, it's not even shots.
There's again so much noise on
shots that what the best measure
they can find on team, or
player is contribution to possession.
The teams that keep that puck,
the teams that have the puck,
are the ones that
are most likely to shoot.
The ones who are most likely to shoot
are most likely to score goals.
But they had to figure that out going
backwards looking for the more and
more fundamental measure, and you can
think of these as process measures.
They're getting away from the noisy,
rare outcome measure of a goal,
to the more fundamental more reliable
measure, process measure possession.
What about non-hockey applications
you might reasonably ask?
Well it's hard to come up with them,
one I'd push you to think about what
that means for your organization,
but one conversation I've had along
these lines is with sales organizations.
Can they come up with more fundamental
measures than the traditional
dollars booked?
Can you, for example, consider the process
that leads to that dollars booked.
Is it the number of bids that
a salesperson gets her organization into?
Or maybe before that,
is it the relationship building
that the salesperson does in order to get
the bids in order to book the dollars?
Or maybe even it's earlier than that.
It's an earlier process yet.
It's the number of contacts generated.
And we don't know exactly which of
these would be most persistent.
It will vary of course by organization and
by industry, but
the idea is to take data to the problem.
And determine where in the process
you might start adding assessments
to get away from these relatively, rare
noisy outcome measures at the very least
to supplement them with more fundamental
drivers earlier in the process.
I wanna end this section with a quote from
Shane Battier, another sports example,
another Michael Lewis example.
This was an article written in
The New York Times Magazine
a few years ago, where Shane Battier
was playing for the Houston Rockets,
and the Rockets were famously
users of data analytics.
And Battier was famously a player,
who despite not having any obvious,
flashy Stats, or
obvious skills hung around the NBA.
Teams found him valuable, and
he became even more valuable
when he went to the Rockets.
They started looking at process,
they started coaching him on
here's something you can do differently
that's gonna influence the game.
If you defend a player, for
example, this way you're gonna decrease
the likelihood that he makes the shot.
If you play offense this way,
if you attack the post in this way,
you're more likely to score.
So it's always likelihood with the
Rockets, it's always likelihood in sports
analytics, and it allowed Battier,
kind of freed him up to focus on what he
knew was right, and not worry so much
about whether it happened to turn out well
on any particular trip down the court,
or happened to turn out badly.
On another trip down the court
he could focus on the process.
He put it this way, knowing the odds,
Battier can pursue an inherently
uncertain strategy with total certainty.
He can devote himself to a process, and
disregard the outcome
to any given encounter.
This is critical, because in basketball,
as in everything else,
luck plays a role and Battier cannot
afford to let it distract him.